CHAPTER 44
ELIZABETH had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day
after her reaching Pemberley, and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn
the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false, for on the very morning after their arrival at Lambton these
visitors came.
They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returning
to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in a coracle driving
up the street.
Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small
degree of her surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honor which she
expected.
Her uncle and aunt were all amazement, and the embarrassment of her manner, as she spoke,
joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day,
opened to them a new idea on the business.
Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that there was no other way of accounting
for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece.
While these newly born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth's
feelings was at every moment increasing.
She was quite amazed at her own discomposure, but amongst other causes of disquiet she dreaded
Unless the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favor, and more
than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would
fail her.
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen, and as she walked up and down
the room, endeavoring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her
uncle and aunt as made everything worse.
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place.
With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed
as herself.
Since her being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud, but
the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy.
She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.
Miss Darcy was tall and on a larger scale than Elizabeth, and, though little more than
sixteen, her figure was formed and her appearance womanly and graceful.
She was less handsome than her brother, but there was sense and good humor in her face,
and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle.
Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as a cute and unembarrassed an observer as
ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.
They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming
to wait on her, and she had barely time to express her satisfaction and prepare for such
a visitor, when Bingley's quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered
the room.
All Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away, but had she still felt any,
it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed
himself on seeing her again.
He inquired in a friendly, though general, way after her family, and looked and spoke
with the same good-humored ease that he had ever done.
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself.
They had long wished to see him.
The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention.
The suspicions which had just arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation
towards each with an earnest, though guarded inquiry, and they soon drew from those inquiries
the full conviction that one of them, at least, knew what it was to love.
Of the ladies' sensations they remained a little in doubt, but that the gentleman was
overflowing with admiration was evident enough.
Elizabeth on her side had much to do.
She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors.
She wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all.
And in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success,
for those to whom she endeavored to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favor.
Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined to be pleased.
In seeing Bingley her thoughts naturally flew to her sister, and, oh, how ardently did she
long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner.
Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice
pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance.
But, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behavior to Miss
Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane.
No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard.
Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister.
On this point she was soon satisfied, and two or three little circumstances occurred
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured
by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared.
He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which
had something of real regret, that it was a very long time since he had had the pleasure
of seeing her, and, before she could reply, he added,
It is above eight months.
We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact, and he afterwards took occasion to
ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters were at Longbourn.
There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark, but there was a look
and a manner which gave them meaning.
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself, but whenever she did
catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general complacence, and in all that he said,
she heard an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced
her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary
its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day.
When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with
whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace, when she saw him thus
civil not only to herself but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and
recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the change was
so great and struck so forcibly on her mind that she could hardly restrain her astonishment
from being visible.
Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending
reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours,
and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.
Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour, and when they arose to depart, Mr.
Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs.
Gardiner and Miss Bennet to dinner at Pemberley before they left the country.
Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed.
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most
concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head.
Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect
willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after
the next was fixed on.
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a
and many inquiries to make after all their hurtful sure friends.
Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased,
and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them,
capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction, though while it was
passing the enjoyment of it had been little.
Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed
with them only long enough to hear their favorable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried
away to dress.
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity.
It was not their wish to force her communication.
It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea
of.
It was evident that he was very much in love with her.
They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well, and, as far as their acquaintance
reached, there was no fault to find.
They could not be untouched by his politeness, and had they drawn his character from their
own feelings in his servant's report without any reference to any other account, the circle
in hurtful sure to which he was known would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy.
There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper, and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four years old, and whose
own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected.
Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their Lambton friends that could materially
lessen its weight.
They had nothing to accuse him of but pride.
Pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of
a small market town where the family did not visit.
It was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation.
For though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood,
it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting derbyshire, he had left many debts
behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last, and the evening,
though as it passed seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one
in that mansion, and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out.
She certainly did not hate him.
No, hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling
a dislike against him that could be so called.
The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly
admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling, and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing
forward his disposition in so amiable a light which yesterday had produced.
But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of good will which
could not be overlooked.
It was gratitude, gratitude not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her
still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him,
and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection.
He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed on this
accidental meeting most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate
display of regard or any peculiarity of manner where their two selves only were concerned,
was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister.
Such a change in a man of so much pride, exciting not only astonishment but gratitude, for to
love ardent love it must be attributed, and as such its impression on her was of a sort
to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined.
She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare,
and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how
far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told
her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of his addresses.
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece that such a striking
civility as Miss Darcy's in coming to see them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley,
for she had reached it only to a late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be
equaled, by some exertion of politeness on their side, and consequently that it would be highly
expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth
was pleased, though when she asked herself the reason she had very little to say in reply.
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before,
and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.
Chapter 45
Convinced, as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of her had originated in jealousy,
she could not help feeling how unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to her,
and was curious to know with how much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now
be renewed.
On reaching the house they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect
rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows, opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing
view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn. In this house they were received by Miss Darcy,
who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with all the embarrassment
which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who
felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,
however, did her justice and pitied her. By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed
only by a curtsy, and, on their being seated, a pause. Awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Ansley, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman,
whose endeavor to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than
either of the others, and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth,
the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough
to join in it, and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of its being
heard. Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley, and that she
could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention. This observation
would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance, but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much.
Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the
she feared that the master of the house might be amongst them, and whether she wished or feared
it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour
without hearing Miss Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry
after the health of her family. She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the others
said no more. The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants
with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the finest fruits in season. But this did not take
place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Ansley to Miss Darcy had been given
to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole party, for though they could not all
talk, they could all eat, and the beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches
soon collected them round the table. While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of
deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy by the feelings
which prevailed on his entering the room. And then, though but a moment before she had believed her
wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he came. He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner,
who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana that morning.
No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed,
a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw
that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely
an eye which did not watch his behavior when he first came into the room. In no countenance was
a tint of curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the smiles which
overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects, for jealousy had not yet made her
desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister
and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded, as much as possible, every attempt at conversation
on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this likewise, and, in the imprudence of anger,
took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,
Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the blankshire militia removed from Meryton?
They must be a great loss to your family.
In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name, but Elizabeth instantly
comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts, and the various recollections
connected with him gave her a moment's distress. But, exerting herself vigorously to repel the
natured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone.
While she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened complexion,
earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion and unable to lift up her eyes.
Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend,
she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint. But she had merely intended to
compose Elizabeth by bringing forth the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial,
to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps,
to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of
her family were connected with that core. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss
Darcy's meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed where secrecy was possible,
except to Elizabeth. And from all Bingley's connections her brother was particularly
anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him,
of their becoming hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan,
and without meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet,
it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend.
Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion, and as Miss Bingley, vexed
and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time,
though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet,
scarcely recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed
turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to affix them on her more and more cheerfully.
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned,
and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage, Miss Bingley was venting her feelings
and criticisms on Elizabeth's person, behaviour and dress. But Georgiana would not join her.
Her brother's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour. His judgment could not err. And he
spoke in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her
otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not
help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.
How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy, she cried. I never in my life saw
anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. She has grown so brown and coarse.
Louisa and I were agreeing that we should not have known her again.
However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying
that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence
of travelling in the summer. For my own part, she rejoined, I must confess that I never could
see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin, her complexion has no brilliancy, and her features
are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character, there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth
are tolerable, but not out of the common way, and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been
called so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp,
shrewish look, which I do not like at all, and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion which is intolerable. Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth,
this was not the best method of recommending herself. But angry people are not always wise,
and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected.
He was resolutely silent, however, and from a determination of making him speak she continued,
I remember when we first knew her in Hertfordshire how amazed we all were to find that she was a
reputed beauty, and I particularly recollect your saying one night after they had been dining at
Netherfield, she a beauty, I should as soon call her mother a wit. But afterwards she seemed to
on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.
Yes, replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, but that was only when I first saw her,
for it is many months since I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him
to say what gave no one any pain but herself. Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that
occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them both.
The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who
had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit,
of everything but himself. Yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him,
and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her nieces beginning the subject.
End of chapter 45. Recorded March 4, 2006, in Bishop, California.